mistakes are ubiquitous error is always
with us the whole purpose of creating
new knowledge is to correct errors we
can't have certainty about anything ever
but at the same time this does not mean
that all claims to truth are on equal
footing relativism the idea that all
claims the truth are equal so everyone's
opinion has equal value is false science
mathematics philosophy and morality
uncover objective truth about reality
it's just that objective truth does not
mean what most people think it means if
something is objectively true this does
not mean it is certainly true let's
pause for a moment if I'm certain what
does that mean what just means I feel
some way I feel certain certainty is an
emotion it's a feeling you get or at
least a feeling that some people seem to
want to have but it's a feeling the
feeling that you are definitely without
a doubt correct and that is no guarantee
that you are you should have doubts
doubt is good someone without doubt is
dogmatic and dogmatism only ever leads
to evil do you remember a time when you
were certain that through any two points
only a single line could be drawn
perhaps you still are depending upon how
much maths you remember
so try now draw two random points
anywhere on a piece of paper and then
try and draw a straight line through
those points it appears only one as
possible
have you tried well think of it even
though it's said only one line to be
drawn through these two points
and indeed Euclid who laid down the
foundations of our mathematical
understanding of geometry provided a
rock-solid mathematical proof and this
is what you were taught in a high school
geometry class a unique straight line
through two points so there's a proof
but are you certain of so simple a truth
most people are certain at least for
some time that only one such straight
line can be drawn but now if we take our
two points and we bend our piece of
paper suddenly through those two points
more straight lines can be drawn
your prior certainty is undermined by a
simple change of perspective but maybe
you've got objections now you still
refuse to accept this that's cheating
you might say or the line is bent those
weren't in the rules but the point here
is you might have a doubt now and should
you doubt it did you misunderstand the
instruction as I first posed it to draw
a straight line through those two points
could I have phrased it in such a way as
to not be misunderstood by you well car
Papa once said it is impossible to speak
in such a way that you cannot be
misunderstood and so it is with all
knowledge we always have doubts we can
always misunderstand and we can never be
certain